DelaDect Detection API
======================

Overview
--------
The detection package exposes both crack and delamination workflows under
``deladect.detection``:

- crack-oriented functions in :mod:`deladect.detection.crack_detection`
- class-based delamination workflows in :mod:`deladect.detection.delamination`

In current revisions, crack convenience helpers are exposed as function-level
APIs, not as methods on ``Specimen``.

.. currentmodule:: deladect.detection

Public entry points
-------------------

Classes
^^^^^^^

.. autosummary::
   :toctree: generated

   DelaminationDetector
   EdgeDetector
   DiffuseDetector
   crack_detection
   delamination

Class walkthroughs and examples are documented in :doc:`delamination`.

Functions
^^^^^^^^^

.. autosummary::
   :toctree: generated

   crack_eval
   crack_eval_by_orientation
   crack_eval_crossply
   crack_eval_plus_minus
   plot_cracks

Coordinate convention
---------------------
Crack segments follow ``[row, col]`` ordering (equivalent to ``[y, x]``).

- In memory: ``[[row0, col0], [row1, col1]]``
- In plots: ``col`` maps to x-axis, ``row`` maps to y-axis

Keep this convention when implementing custom spacing/grouping logic.

Common recipes
--------------

Cross-ply crack detection (sample-1)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: python

    from pathlib import Path

   from deladect.detection import crack_eval_crossply
   from deladect.specimen import Specimen
   from skimage.io import imread

    data_root = Path("specimen_examples") / "sample-1"
    frame_paths = sorted(data_root.glob("*.png"))

    specimen = Specimen.from_cross_ply(
        name="sample-1",
        scale_px_mm=41.03328366,
        path_full=str(data_root),
        sorting_key="_sc",
        image_types=["png"],
        auto_init_stacks=False,
        results_root="results",
        avg_crack_width_px=8.0,
    )

    specimen.path_full_list = [str(path) for path in frame_paths]
    specimen.image_stack_full = [imread(str(path)) for path in frame_paths]

    crack_results = crack_eval_crossply(specimen, export_images=True, save_cracks=True)

    print(crack_results.keys())  # typically dict_keys(['0', '90'])
    print(crack_results["0"]["metrics"].head())

Combined delamination
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: python

   from deladect.detection import DelaminationDetector

    interface = specimen.add_interface(name="i0", upper_ply_index=0, lower_ply_index=1)
    detector = DelaminationDetector(specimen, interface)

    # diffuse ROIs usually work best with both cross-ply crack families
    cracks_all = Specimen.join_cracks(
        crack_results["0"]["cracks"],
        crack_results["90"]["cracks"],
    )

    combined = detector.detect_both_delaminations(
        cracks=cracks_all,
        save_masks=True,
        save_metrics=True,
        edge_exclusion_px=5,
    )

   print(combined["paths"]["metrics"])

Troubleshooting quick notes
---------------------------
- ``ImportError: crackdect is required``: install and activate an environment
  compatible with CrackDect and NumPy.
- Missing overlays/masks: ensure ``save_overlays=True`` and/or
  ``save_masks=True`` in workflow calls.
- Unexpected crack direction: verify ply orientation metadata and the resulting
  ``theta`` mapping.
- Diffuse over-detection: increase ``reference_skip`` and reduce
  ``post_threshold_closing_scale`` before changing many other parameters.

See also
--------
- :doc:`delamination` for edge, diffuse, combined, and multi-interface logic.
- :doc:`examples/crack_detection` for end-to-end crack examples.
- :doc:`examples/delamination_multi_interface` for sample-5 multi-interface workflow.
- :doc:`results_storage` for NPZ/metadata storage conventions.

API details are available in autogenerated pages under ``docs/source/generated``.
